# Monarch Project Template
A [Cookiecutter](https://cookiecutter.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) template for projects using [`Sphinx`](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/) + [`tox`](https://tox.wiki/en/latest/index.html) + [`poetry`](https://python-poetry.org/docs/). This template was developed thanks to the [tutorials by the cookiecutter project](https://cookiecutter.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tutorials/index.html) along with the instructions provided in [HelloCookieCutter1](https://github.com/BruceEckel/HelloCookieCutter1/blob/master/Readme.rst) by Bruce Eckel. The `tox` configuration is partly accreditted to Charles Tapley Hoyt's [cookiecutter implementation](https://github.com/cthoyt/cookiecutter-snekpack/blob/main/%7B%7Bcookiecutter.package_name%7D%7D/tox.ini).

# Getting started

First, install the [cruft](https://github.com/cruft/cruft) package. Cruft enables keeping projects up-to-date with future updates made to this original template.

```
pip install cruft
```

Next, create a project using the `monarch-project-template`.
```
cruft create https://github.com/monarch-initiative/monarch-project-template
```

This kickstarts an interactive session where you declare the following:
 - `project_name`: Name of the project. [defaults to: Project_X]
 - `project_description`: Description of the project. [defaults to: This is the project description.].
 - `file_name`: The name of the main python file. [defaults to: `main` for `main.py`]
 - `greeting_recipient`: Just a string that will be displayed when the boilerplate code is invoked. [defaults to: `World` as in `Hello, World!`]
 - `full_name`: Your name [defaults to: Author 1]
 - `email`: your email [defaults to: author@org.org]
 - `license`: Choose one from [`MIT`, `BSD-3`, `GNU GPL v3.0`, `Apache Software License 2.0`] [defaults to: `MIT`]
 - ⚠️`github_token_variable_name_for_doc_deployment`: The github token **variable name** for document deployment using `Sphinx`. [defaults to: `GH_TOKEN`]
 - ⚠️`github_token_variable_name_for_pypi_deployment`: The github token **variable name** which aligns with your autogenerated PyPI token for making releases. [defaults to: `PYPI_TOKEN`]

> :warning: **Do NOT enter actual token here, this is just the variable name that holds the token value in the project repository's Secrets.**

This will generate the project folder abiding by the template configuration specified by `monarch-project-template` in the [`cookiecutter.json`](https://github.com/monarch-initiative/monarch-project-template/blob/main/cookiecutter.json) file. 

# What does this do?

The following files and directories are autogenerated in the project:

 - Github wokflows:
   - For code quality checks (`qc.yml`)
   - Documentation deployment (`deploy-docs.yml`)
   - PyPI deployment (`pypi-publish.yml`)
 - `docs` directory with `Sphinx` configuration files and an `index.rst`file.
 - `src` directory structure with the `project_name` directory within it.
   - Within the `project_name` directory, there are 2 python files:
     - `main_file.py`
     - `cli.py` for [`click`](https://click.palletsprojects.com) commands.
 - `tests` directory with a very basic test.
 - `poetry` compatible `pyproject.toml` file containing minimal package requirements.
 - `tox.ini` file containing configuration for:
   -  `coverage-clean`
   -  `lint`
   -  `codespell`
   -  `docstr-coverage`
   -  `pytest`
- `LICENSE` file based on the choice made during setup. 
- `README.md` file containing `project_description` value entered during setup.


# Setting Up a New Project

Upon creating a new project from the `cookiecutter-monarch-ingest` template, there are a few steps you should take to finish setting up the project. First, change into the newly created project.

```bash
cd <project_name>
```

#### GitHub Repository
1. Create a new repository on GitHub.
1. Enable GitHub Actions to read and write to the repository (required to deploy the project to GitHub Pages).
   - in GitHub, go to Settings -> Action -> General -> Workflow permissions and choose read and write permissions
1. Initialize the local repository and push the code to GitHub. For example:

   ```bash
   git init
   git remote add origin https://github.com/<github_org_name>/<project_name>.git
   git add -A && git commit -m "Initial commit"
   git push -u origin main
   ```

#### Setup Python Environment and Install Poetry
To finish setting up the project first we'll need to set up a Python development environment. You can either use your system `poetry` or install it within a repository virtual environment.

##### Use System Poetry
To use you're system `poetry`, install `poetry` if you haven't already.
```
pip install poetry
```

##### Install Poetry in a Virtual Environment
To use poetry within a virtual environmen and install `poetry` to the environment use your system Python or install `pyenv` and select your python version with `pyenv local 3.13`. Then create a virtual environment and install poetry to it. You will also want to add `cruft` to the virtual environment to keep updated with this template.
```
pyenv <python_version>
python -m venv .venv
. .venv/bin/activate
pip install poetry
pip install cruft
```

#### Install Dependencies
Now that we have the basic repository set up and the background dependencies, we can set up the dependencies for the rest of the project. First, we'll use poetry to install project dependencies.
```
poetry install
```

##### Add `poetry-dynamic-versioning` as a plugin
Our usage of poetry requires the dynamic versionining plugin.
```
poetry self add "poetry-dynamic-versioning[plugin]"
```
**Note**: If you are using a Linux system and the above doesn't work giving you the following error `Invalid PEP 440 version: ...`, you could alternatively run:
```
poetry add poetry-dynamic-versioning
```

#### Set-up `pre-commit`
`pre-commit` runs hooks on every commit to automatically point out issues in code such as missing semicolons, trailing whitespace, and debug statements. For more information click [here](https://pre-commit.com).

```
poetry run pre-commit install
```
which will result in the message: 
```
pre-commit installed at .git/hooks/pre-commit
``` 
This indicates that you have a successful `pre-commit` setup.

#### Run `tox` to see if the setup works
```
poetry run tox
```

This should run all the bullets mentioned above under the `tox` configuration and ideally you should see the following at the end of the run:
```
  coverage-clean: OK (0.20=setup[0.05]+cmd[0.15] seconds)
  lint-fix: OK (0.40=setup[0.01]+cmd[0.30,0.09] seconds)
  codespell-write: OK (0.20=setup[0.02]+cmd[0.18] seconds)
  docstr-coverage: OK (0.29=setup[0.01]+cmd[0.28] seconds)
  py: OK (1.29=setup[0.01]+cmd[1.28] seconds)
  congratulations :) (2.55 seconds)
```

And as the last line says: `congratulations :)`!! Your project is ready to evolve!

> If you have an error running `tox` your python dependencies may be out of sync and you may be able to fix it by running `poetry lock` and then running `tox` again.

# Final test to see everything is wired properly

On the command line, type the `project_name`. In this example, `ABCD`:
```
poetry run <project_name> run
```
Should return `Hello, **greeting_recipient value chosen during setup**`

To run commands within the poetry environment either preface the command with `poetry run`, i.e. `poetry run /path-to/my-command --options` or open the poetry shell with `poetry shell`.

# Future updates to the project's boilerplate code

In order to be up-to-date with the template, first check if there is a mismatch between the project's boilerplate code and the template by running:
```
cruft check
```

This indicates if there is a difference between the current project's boilerplate code and the latest version of the project template. If the project is up-to-date with the template:
```
SUCCESS: Good work! Project's cruft is up to date and as clean as possible :).
```

Otherwise, it will indicate that the project's boilerplate code is not up-to-date by the following:
```
FAILURE: Project's cruft is out of date! Run `cruft update` to clean this mess up.
```

For viewing the difference, run `cruft diff`. This shows the difference between the project's boilerplate code and the template's latest version.

After running `cruft update`, the project's boilerplate code will be updated to the latest version of the template.

# Setting up PyPI release

For the first time, you'll need to just run the following commands:
```
poetry build
poetry publish -u YOUR_PYPI_USERNAME -p YOUR_PYPI_PASSWORD
```
This will release a 0.0.0 version of your project on PyPI.

## Automating this via Github Release
Use "[Trusted Publishers](https://docs.pypi.org/trusted-publishers/)" by PyPI

## Creating documentation
The documentation desired should be placed in the `docs` directory (markdown or reStructured format files).

Let's say the user has 2 more .rst files to add:
 - intro.rst
 - installation.rst

These two files should be placed in the docs directory and the `index.rst` file should be updated to read the following

```rst
Welcome to {{project_name}}'s documentation!
=========================================================

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
   :caption: Contents:

   intro
   installation

Indices and tables
==================

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
* :ref:`search`

```
This lets sphinx know to look for theses rst files and generate equivalent HTML files.

Documentation is automatically built and deployed via the github workflow `deploy-docs.yml`. 
When changes are added to the main branch, this workflow is triggered. For this to work, the user needs to 
set-up the github repository of the project to enable documentation from a specific branch. In the `Settings` tab 
of the repository, click the `Pages` section in the left bar. For the `Branch`, choose the `gh-pages` branch.

The full GitHub Pages documentation can be found [here](https://docs.github.com/en/pages/quickstart). 